# Challenge Project #1: Project Euler

## Overview

## Grading

There are no automated tests for this project. To get credit, come show me your code and talk through the approach you used to solve
each problem.

You can get credit any time before the end of the day on December 6 (the last day of classes). Please don't wait until the last minute if 
you want to ensure that we'll have time to schedule a meeting to go over your work.

## Problems

### Even Fibonacci Numbers (Problem 2)

Each new term in the Fibonacci sequence is generated by adding the previous two terms. By starting with 1 and 2, the first 10 terms will be:

1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, ...

By considering the terms in the Fibonacci sequence whose values do not exceed four million, find the sum of the even-valued terms.

### 10001st Prime (Problem 7)

By listing the first six prime numbers: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, and 13, we can see that the 6th prime is 13.

What is the 10 001st prime number?

### Longest Collatz Sequence (Problem 14)

The following iterative sequence is defined for the set of positive integers:

```
n → n/2 (n is even)
n → 3n + 1 (n is odd)
```

Using the rule above and starting with 13, we generate the following sequence:

13 → 40 → 20 → 10 → 5 → 16 → 8 → 4 → 2 → 1

It can be seen that this sequence (starting at 13 and finishing at 1) contains 10 terms. Although it has not been proven, it is thought
that all starting numbers finish at 1. This result is known as the Collatz Conjecture after the mathematician Lothar Collatz.

Which starting number, under one million, produces the longest chain?

NOTE: Once the chain starts the terms are allowed to go above one million.

Tips:

- Use a method called `collatz(int n)` that returns the **number of terms** in the sequence starting with `n`.

- The collatz method uses a `while` loop to generate terms of the sequence until it reaches 1, counting the number of terms that are
generated.

- Use a loop to call `collatz` for all values of `n` from 1 to 1 million and keep track of the value of `n` that generates the longest
sequence.
