# Conditionals and Randomness

## Finish RPS

Start by finishing up the Rock, Paper, Scissors program that we began in Wednesday's class.

Some tips:

- Read over the instructions before diving in.
- Keep the code oragnized. Each one of the comments in the skeleton program has a step associated with it. Put the code for each step right under its comment.

**Show your program to me once you have it finished**.

## Setup Lab Directory

Once you have finished RPS, set up a new directory for the rest of the lab.

Change back to your home directory. `~` is a shortcut that always refers to home.

```
cd ~
```

Change to `CMS_167` and then make a new lab directory.

```
cd CMS_167

mkdir Lab_3

cd Lab_3
```

## The `Random` Class

Last time, we talked about using `Math.random()` to generate random events in programs.

A program that creates seqeunces of random numbers is called a **pseudorandom number generator** (PRNG). The *pseudo-* part comes in because the numbers are not truly random; rather, they're being generated by an underlying deterministic algorithm, but in such a way that they have the same statistical properties as a random sequence.

(https://www.random.org/ is a service that claims to generate true random numbers by sampling naturally occurring radio noise in the atmosphere).

Java also includes a built-in `Random` class that implements a more powerful PRNG. It will be useful to us for two main reasons:

1. It contains methods to automatically generate random integers, booleans, and other data types.

2. It allows you to set a **seed** for the random number stream. The seed is the starting value of the random number generator and any 
two RNGs with the same seed will produce the same sequence of values. The ability to generate a **consistent and repeatable** stream of random numbers is useful for testing.

## Passe-Dix

Passe-dix (French for "pass ten") is an ancient dice game. According to some early gambling books, it was allegedly the game played by Roman soldiers to divide the clothes of Jesus at the Crucifixion.

The rules are simple: roll three dice and add their sum. The player wins if the sum is **strictly greater** than 10, loses if the sum is **strictly less** than 10, and draws ("pushes" in gambling terms) if the sum equals 10.

Write a program that implements passe-dix. Use the incomplete pseudocode below as your starting point. Fill in the parts that are missing and convert the `if` statements to correct Java code.

`Random` has a method called `nextInteger`. Calling `nextInteger(N)` returns a random `int` value between 0 and **N - 1**.

```
// Passe-Dix

import java.util.Random;

public class PasseDix {

  public static void main(String[] args) {
  
    // Create new Random object with a seed of zero
    Random rng = new Random(0);
    
    // Roll a die
    // nextInteger(6) returns a value in the range [0, 5]
    // Add 1 to shift the range to [1, 6]
    int die1 = rng.nextInteger(6) + 1;
    
    // Add two more lines to generate the other two dice
    
    // Calculate the sum of the three dice
    
    // Print the three dice and their sum
    
    // Test the result
    if (sum is greater than 10) {
      // Winner
    } else if (sum is less than 10) {
      // Loser
    } else {
      // Push
    }
    
  }

}
```

## Coin and Die

Let's use `Random` to implement another simple game:

- Flip a coin and roll a die.

- The player wins if the coin is heads and the die is even, or the coin is tails and the die is odd. Any other result is a loss.

Use the code below as a starting point and add your own `if` statements to check the two winning conditions.

- The `nextBoolean()` method returns a random `true` / `false` value.

- `nextInteger(N)` returns a random `int` value between 0 and **N - 1**.

- Use the mod operator to test for evenness. The die roll is even if `die % 2 == 0`.

```
// Coin and die game

import java.util.Random;

public class CoinAndDie {

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    
    // Create a new Random object with a seed value of 0
    
    // Flip a coin
    // nextBoolean() generates a random true / false value
    boolean isHeads = rng.nextBoolean();
    
    // Roll a die using nextInteger

    // Modify the pseudocode below to check the winning conditions
    if (isHeads AND die is even) {
      // Winning message
    } else if (not isHeads AND die is odd) {
      // Winning message
    } else {
      // Losing message
    }
    
  }

}
```

## Printing an Object

Modify your program to print the `Random` object.

```
System.out.println(rng);
```

What do you see? Do you have any theories on why the output looks the way it does?

**Think about the output before reading ahead**.

What's going on? When you print an object, Java prints the class name (`Random`, in this case) and the object's **hashcode**, which is based on the address in the computer's memory where the object is stored.

Try modifying your program one more time to create and print a second `Random` object:

```
Random rng = new Random();
System.out.println(rng);
Random rng2 = new Random();
System.out.println(rng2);
```

You should see that the two `Random` objects have different hashcodes, because they were created by two different calls to the constructor method using the `new` keyword to allocate memory each time.

`rng` and `rng2` belong to the same *class* of object (`Random`), but they exist independently and are stored in different memory locations.
